Igneous Rocks and 
the Rock Cycle
Designed to meet South Carolina 
Department of Education 
2005 Science Academic Standards


Table of Contents
’ü« What are Rocks? (slide 3) (Standard: 3-3.1 (covers slides 3-39))
’ü« Major Rock Types (slide 4)
’ü« The Rock Cycle (slide 5)
’ü« Igneous Rocks (slide 6) (3-3.1)
’ü« What happens to molten rock as it cools? (slide 7)
’ü« Crystal size and Cooling Rates (slide 8)
’ü« Texture (slide 9-10)
’ü« Igneous Rock Textures: (slide 11-20)
’ü« Phaneritic (12) , Aphanitic (13) , Porphyritic (14) , Glassy (15) , Pegmatitc (16), 
Pyroclastic (17 - 18), Aa Lava (19) , Pahoehoe (20)
’ü« Igneous Rocks Mineral Composition (slide 21)
’ü« Magma and Bowens Reaction Series (slide 22 - 23)
’ü« Mineral Composition and Magma (slide 24)
’ü« Ferromagnesian Silicates (slide 25)
’ü« Non-Ferromagnesian Silicates (slide 26)
’ü« Igneous Rock Categories: Granitic, Basaltic, Andesitic (slide 27)
’ü« Igneous Rocks: (slide 28 - 38)
’ü« Granite (29) , Rhyolite (30) , Pumice (31) , Obsidian (32) , Gabbro (33) , Basalt (34) , Diabase (35) , 
Andesite (36) , Diorite (37) , Tuff (38)
’ü« Igneous Rocks in the Landscape (slide 39)
’ü« Igneous Rocks in South Carolina (slide 40)
’ü« South Carolina Science Standards (slides 41)
’ü« Resources and References (slide 42)
2

What are Rocks?
’ü« Most rocks are an aggregate of one or more minerals and 
a few rocks are composed of non-mineral matter.
’ü« There are three major rock types: 
’ü« 1.  Igneous
’ü« 2.  Metamorphic
’ü« 3.  Sedimentary
3
Table of Contents

Major Rock Types
’ü« Igneous rocks are formed by the cooling of molten 
magma or lava near, at, or below the EarthŌĆÖs surface.
’ü« Sedimentary rocks are formed by the lithification of 
inorganic and organic sediments deposited near or at 
the EarthŌĆÖs surface.
’ü« Metamorphic rocks are formed when preexisting rocks 
are transformed into new rocks by heat and pressure, 
usually below the EarthŌĆÖs surface.
4
Table of Contents

The Rock Cycle
5
Table of Contents
The Rock Cycle graphic is available from the SCGS website: http://www.dnr.sc.gov/geology/images/Rockcycle-pg.pdf

Igneous Rocks
’ü« Igneous rocks are formed by the cooling of molten rock.
’ü« There are two major states of molten rock: Magma and Lava.
’ü« Magma is a form of molten rock that exists below the EarthŌĆÖs 
surface.
’ü« Lava is the term given to magma once it reaches the EarthŌĆÖs 
surface, usually in the form of a volcanic eruption.
’ü« There are two major classifications of igneous rocks:  Intrusive and 
Extrusive.
’ü« Intrusive igneous rocks are formed by magma that cools below 
the EarthŌĆÖs surface. 
’ü« Extrusive igneous rocks are formed by lava that cools at the  
EarthŌĆÖs surface.
’ü« Intrusive igneous rocks generally cool very slowly deep below the  
earthŌĆÖs surface or as the magma is rising to the earthŌĆÖs surface. 
’ü« Extrusive igneous rocks generally cool quickly when they reach the 
earthŌĆÖs surface usually through volcanoes or fissure.
6
Table of Contents

What happens to molten rock as it cools?
’ü« When the temperature of molten rock begins to drop there is a loss of energy that 
causes ions to slow down. As the ions slow down, they group together and arrange 
themselves into orderly crystalline structures. This process is referred to as 
crystallization. 
’ü« During crystallization, the silicon and oxygen atoms are the first to link together 
forming silicon-oxygen tetrahedrons, which are the building block of all silicate 
minerals. 
’ü« As crystallization continues, these individual silicon-oxygen tetrahedrons join 
with one another, and other ions, to form the basic structure of most minerals and 
igneous  rocks.
’ü« Environmental conditions  including temperature and the presence of water or 
gases during crystallization affect the composition, the size, and the arrangement 
of the mineral grains.
’ü« The size and arrangement of mineral crystals, also referred to as grains, define the 
texture of the rock.
’ü« Geologists use mineral and textural classifications to infer information about the 
environmental setting in which different igneous rocks are formed.
7
Table of Contents

Crystal Size and Cooling Rates
’ü« Slower cooling rates produce larger individual crystals in the rock
’ü« Intrusive igneous rocks generally cool very slowly and tend to have large 
crystals that produce a course-grained rock.
’ü« Phaneritic rocks are coarse-grained rocks which contain individual crystals 
that are relatively even in size and large enough for scientists to identify the 
different mineral grains that compose the rock.
’ü« Faster cooling rates produce smaller individual crystals in the rock 
’ü« Extrusive igneous rocks tend to cool quickly and are characterized by smaller 
grains that produce a fine-grained rock.
’ü« Aphanitic is the term used to describe very fine grained rocks.
’ü« Porphyritic textured rocks contain both a coarse and fine-grained texture. 
’ü« The coarse grains in a porphyritic rock begin to develop as the magma is 
cooling below the surface of the earth.  Following eruption or exposure to 
lower temperatures, the remaining magma or lava cools very quickly and 
forms minerals with fine-grained textures.  As a result, porphyritic textures 
contain both coarse- and fineŌĆōgrained minerals.
8
Table of Contents

Texture
’ü« Texture is a term used to describe the size, shape, and 
arrangement of interlocking crystallized mineral grains 
in an igneous rock.
’ü« Two major factors affect the size of crystal grains in an 
igneous rock: 
’ü« 1) Rate at which molten rock cools; slow or fast
’ü« 2) Amount of dissolved gases or fluids in the magma.
9
Table of Contents

Texture
’ü« Igneous minerals vary greatly in grain size.  Grain-size 
classes are similar to the sedimentary scale, but there are 
fewer divisions with a greater range of size.
’ü« Phenocrysts are grains in an igneous rock that are larger 
than the other grains that make up the rest of the rock.
Grain Size 
Categories
Grain Size Divisions
fine grained = < 1 mm
medium grained = 1 mm < 5 mm
coarse grained = 5 mm < 3 cm
very coarse-grained = > 3 cm
Phenocrysts Texture
microphenocrysts = 0.03 mm ŌĆō 0.3 mm 
phenocrysts = 0.3 mm ŌĆō 5 mm
megaphenocrysts = > 5 mm
 10
Table of Contents

Igneous Rock Textures
’ü« Phaneritic (Intrusive)
’ü« Aphanitic (Extrusive)
’ü« Porphyritic (Intrusive and Extrusive)
’ü« Glassy (Extrusive)
’ü« Pegmatitic (Intrusive)
’ü« Pyroclastic Materials (Extrusive)
’ü« Aa Lava (Extrusive)
’ü« Pahoehoe Lava (Extrusive)
11
Table of Contents

Phaneritic Texture
’ü« Phaneritic (Intrusive)
’ü« Phaneritic rocks are coarse-grained rocks which form below the EarthŌĆÖs surface.
’ü« The individual crystals are relatively even-sized and large enough for scientists 
to identify the different mineral grains that compose the rock.
Quartz Crystals:
(White)
 Feldspar Crystals:
(Pink)
Biotite Crystals: 
(Black)
Granite rock with a phaneritic texture
Copyright ┬® Dr. Richard Busch
12
Table of Contents

Aphanitic Texture
’ü« Aphanitic (Extrusive)
’ü« Aphanitic rocks are very fine-grained and contain 
crystals that are too small to distinguish without the 
aid of a magnifying lens. 
’ü« Aphanitic rocks are often described by how light or 
dark the rock appears.  Lighter colored aphanitic 
rocks contain mostly non-ferromagnesian silicate 
minerals.  Darker colored aphanitic rocks contain 
mostly ferromagnesian silicate minerals.
’ü« Aphanitic rocks may also contain vesicles of remnant 
gas that give the rock a vesicular texture.  Vesicles 
form when the rock cools very quickly and preserves 
the openings formed by the expansion of trapped gas 
bubbles.
Basalt rock with an aphanitic 
and vesicular texture
Copyright ┬® Dr.  Richard Busch
13
Table of Contents

Porphyritic Texture
’ü« Porphyritic (Intrusive and Extrusive)
’ü« Porphyritic rocks contain both  coarse- and 
fine-grained textures indicating different 
environmental conditions which formed the 
rock. 
’ü« The coarse grains in a porphyritic rock 
develop as the magma is cooling below the 
surface of the earth. 
’ü« The fine-grained component of a porphyriic 
rocks forms when the magma or lava cools 
faster.
’ü« The large coarse-grained crystals are referred 
to as phenocrysts.
’ü« The small fine-grained crystals are referred to 
as groundmass.
Rhyolite rock with 
porphyritic texture containing 
phenocrysts of olivine and 
pyroxene and a gabbro 
groundmass.
14
Table of Contents
Copyright  ┬®AGI

Glassy Texture
’ü« Glassy (Extrusive) 
’ü« Glassy textured rocks are formed by very rapid 
cooling of magma.
’ü« Glassy rocks often form from magmas with 
high silica content that arranges into long 
chainlike structures before crystallization 
occurs. These silica chains increase the viscosity 
of the magma and it once it eventually cools it 
forms a glassy textured rock.
’ü« Glassy rocks can be considered amorphous 
because they have no crystalline structure.
’ü« Glassy rocks are classified by the amount of 
glass contained by the rock:
’ü« Glass-bearing:  0-20% glass
’ü« Glass-rich:   20-50% glass
’ü« Glassy:  50 ŌĆō 100% glass
’ü« Obsidian is a common glassy rock.
Obsidian rock with a glassy
texture and conchoidal fractures
Copyright ┬® Dr. Richard Bush
15
Table of Contents

Pegmatitic Texture
’ü« Pegmatitic (Intrusive)
’ü« Pegmatitic rocks contain large interlocking 
crystalline grains > 1-2 centimeter in diameter.
’ü« Pegmatites are commonly composed of quartz, 
feldspar, and mica minerals.
’ü« Pegmatities form from a combination of 
hydrothermal and igneous processes; and is 
dependant on the presence of fluids and 
volatiles such as water, chlorine, bromine, 
sulfur,  and fluorine.
’ü« Pegmatites form late in the crystallization 
process when there are a lot of fluids present in 
the molten rock. The fluids enable individual 
ions to move around more freely, ultimately 
bonding to form very large and sometimes 
exotic crystals. 
’ü« Pegmatitic dikes form around the margins of 
intrusive plutons, or occasionally as veins of 
rock which extend into the pluton.
Copyright ┬® Marli Miller
Examples of pegmatitic veins
extending through rock
Copyright ┬® Albert Copley
16
Table of Contents

Pyroclastic Materials
’ü« Pyroclastic (Extrusive) 
’ü« Pyroclastic materials form when 
individual rock fragments are ejected 
during a violent volcanic eruption and 
consolidate into larger rock composites 
when they deposit on the surface.
’ü« Pyroclastic rocks contain at least 75% 
pyroclastic fragments with the 
remainder consisting of other inorganic 
sediments or organic materials.
’ü« Pyroclastic rocks contain a mixture of 
different types of particles that are not 
cohesively joined by interlocking 
crystals, but instead are consolidated 
masses of multiple rock fragments.
’ü« Tephra is the term used to describe 
pyroclastic sediments.
Copyright ┬® Dr. Richard Busch
Tuff rock with pyroclastic material.
17
Table of Contents

Pyroclastic Fragments
’ü« Pyroclastic materials do not conform well to igneous grain size classifications. 
Instead, geologists use the following  terms to describe pyroclastic fragments:
’ü« Juvenile fragments: volcanic rocks formed  from cooled magma before it is deposited.
’ü« Cognate fragments: volcanic rocks which formed during previous volcanic activity 
and are ejected by a later eruption.
’ü« Accidental fragments: rocks which are disrupted, dislodged, and possibly even 
ejected by the volcano, but are not of volcanic origin (although they may be igneous). 
’ü« Bombs: fragments with a mean diameter > 64 mm, and a rounded shape. 
’ü« Blocks: fragments with a  mean diameter > 64 mm, and a blocky, angular shape.
’ü« Lapilli: fragments  in any shape with a mean diameter of 2-64 mm. 
’ü« Ash: grains of pyroclastic fragments with a mean diameter < 2 mm. This includes 
coarse ash grains (0.032 -2 mm) and fine ash grains (< 0.032 mm).
18
Table of Contents

Aa Lava
’ü« Aa Lava (Extrusive) 
’ü« Aa is a basaltic lava flow that has a rough 
surface, characterized by sharp, jagged 
blocks and protruding spines of volcanic 
rock.
’ü« Aa flows move slowly (5-50 meters per 
hour) and are often several meters thick. 
’ü« As aa lava flows, the outer surface and 
advancing edge cools first.  The molten 
material pushes through the cooled rocks 
and breaks the fragments even more.  As a 
result the lava flow appears more like a 
mass of advancing rubble as apposed to a 
viscous flow. 
’ü« Aa lava flows are common on the Hawaiian 
Islands.   The aa flows move so slowly that 
tourists can walk up to them and take 
pictures.
Aa lava in HawaiiŌĆÖs 
Volcanoes National Park.
Copyright ┬® Bruce Molina, Terra Photographics
Photo Courtesy USGS Hawaiian Volcano Observatory
19
Table of Contents

Pahoehoe Lava
’ü« Pahoehoe Lava (Extrusive)
’ü« Pahoehoe (pronounced pah-hoy-hoy) is 
a basaltic lava flow that has a smooth 
and twisty, rope-like surface.
’ü« The characteristic ropy texture forms as 
the surface lava cools while the molten 
material beneath it is still moving. The 
tension formed by the cooling lava 
causes it to wrinkle as the subsurface 
lava continues to flow. As a result the 
surface cools in a series of overlapping, 
ropy lobes.
’ü« Pahoehoe lava flows move slow enough 
(5-50 meters per hour) for observers to 
watch the cooling lava as it advances 
forward.
Copyright ┬® Bruce Molina, Terra Photographics
Photo Courtesy USGS    
Pahoehoe lava flows in Hawaii.
20
Table of Contents

Igneous Rocks Mineral 
Composition
’ü« The chemical composition of the magma during cooling determines the 
mineral composition of the crystallized rocks.
’ü« 98% of all magma is composed primarily of silicate (SiO2) ions joined 
with aluminum (Al), calcium (Ca), sodium (Na), potassium (K), 
magnesium (Mg), and iron (Fe) ions.
’ü« Magma may also contain trace amounts of other elements such as 
titanium (Ti), manganese (Mn), gold (Au), silver (Ag), and uranium (U).
’ü« During crystallization the minerals combine to form two major groups 
of silicate minerals, these include the dark-colored ferromagnesian 
silicates which crystallize at high temperatures and the light-colored 
nonferromagnesian silicates which crystallize at lower temperatures.
21
Table of Contents

BowenŌĆÖs Reaction Series
’ü« In the early 1900ŌĆÖs  N.L. Bowen and other geologists conducted a series of experiments to 
determine the order at which different silicate minerals crystallize from magma. Their 
results produced a generalized mineral crystallization model that is recognized as BowenŌĆÖs 
Reaction Series, and it states that mineral crystallization will occur in a predictable manner. 
’ü« BowenŌĆÖs Reaction Series is a model that describes the formation of igneous rocks with an 
emphasis on the effect of temperature changes, melting points, and cooling rates, on the 
types of minerals crystallizing and their resultant rock compositions.
’ü« Once crystallization begins, the composition of the liquid magma changes.               
Minerals with higher melting points will begin to solidify leaving behind a liquid from 
which minerals with lower melting temperatures will eventually solidify.
’ü« An  ideal discontinuous crystallizing series progresses from the minerals olivine -
pyroxenes - amphiboles ŌĆō biotite. 
’ü« An ideal continuous series progresses from calcium to sodium-rich plagioclase feldspar.
’ü« Both series merge and are followed by orthoclase feldspar, muscovite, and quartz, with 
quartz exhibiting the lowest crystallization temperature.
22
Table of Contents

BowenŌĆÖs Reaction Series
23
Table of Contents
Crystallization 
Temperature
1400 ┬║C
800 ┬║C
Mafic
Felsic
Intermediate
Olivine
Pyroxene
Amphibole
Biotite
Quartz
Orthoclase Feldspar
Muscovite mica 
Calcium rich
Sodium rich
Discontinuous Series
 Continuous Series


Classification of Igneous Rocks by Mineral 
Composition and Texture
24
Table of Contents
Chemical Composition
 Felsic
(Granitic)
Intermediate
(Andesitic)
Mafic 
(Basaltic)
Ultramafic
Dominant Minerals
Quartz,
Potassium 
Feldspar,
Sodium-rich 
plagioclase 
feldspar
Amphibole,
Sodium-and
calcium-rich 
plagioclase 
feldspar
Pyroxene,
Calcium-rich
plagioclase 
feldspar
Olivine,
Pyroxene
Accessory Minerals
Amphibole,
Muscovite,
Biotite
Pyroxene,
Biotite
Amphibole,
Olivine
Calcium-rich 
plagioclase 
feldspar
Rock Color
(% of dark minerals)
0-25 % 25 ŌĆō 45 % 45 ŌĆō 85 % 85 ŌĆō 100 %
Phaneritic (coarse-grained) Granite Diorite Gabbro Peridotite
Aphanitic (fine- grained) Rhyolite Andesite Basalt Komatiite
Porphyritic Porphyritic used to describe abundant presence of 
phenocrysts in Granite, Diorite, Gabbro, Peridotite, 
Rhyolite, Andesite, and Basalt
UncommonGlassy Obsidian (compact) and  Pumice (frothy-like)
Pyroclastic Tuff (fine grained) and Volcanic Breccia (coarse grained)
T
e
x
t
u
r
e
Modified from Lutgens and Tarbuck 2003 

Ferromagnesian Silicates
’ü« Ferromagnesian silicates crystallize at higher temperatures than non-
ferromagnesian silicates.
’ü« Ferromagnesian silicates contain greater amounts of iron (Fe) and 
magnesium (Mg) and less silica (Si O2) than non-ferromagnesian 
silicates . 
’ü« Ferromagnesian minerals are generally dark in color and can be 
greenish, black, or dark grey. 
’ü« Common ferromagnesian silicate minerals include olivine, pyroxene, 
amphibole, biotite, hornblende, augite, and peridote.
Gabbro rock with olivine (yellowish crystals) and 
Pyroxene (darker crystals) phenocrysts
Copyright ┬® Mark  Milling, AGI
25
Table of Contents

Non-Ferromagnesian Silicates
’ü« Non-ferromagnesian silicates crystallize at lower temperatures that 
ferromagnesian silicates.
’ü« Non-ferromagnesian silicates contain greater amounts of potassium (K), 
sodium (Na), and calcium (Ca) in combination with more silica (Si O2)
than ferromagnesian silicates.
’ü« Non-ferromagnesian minerals are generally light colored, and may be 
white, pink, or light grey.
’ü« Common non-ferromagnesian silicate minerals include quartz, 
muscovite, and feldspars.
Copyright ┬®  Dr. Richard Busch
Granite composed of non-
ferromagnesian
silicates including feldspar 
(pink crystals) and quartz 
(white crystals).
26
Table of Contents

Igneous Rock Categories: 
Felsic to Mafic 
’ü« Igneous rocks are divided into three broad groups Granitic, Basaltic, 
and Andesitic depending on their proportion of felsic (light-colored) 
to mafic (dark-colored) minerals.
’ü« Granitic rocks contain more light-colored feldspars and silica than 
dark- colored minerals. Because of the high feldspar and silica 
content of Granitic rocks, geologists refer to them as being felsic (fel
for feldspar and si for silica).
’ü« The primary minerals in granitic rocks include quartz, feldspar, biotite, 
and amphibole.
’ü« Granitic rocks make up about 70% of the EarthŌĆÖs crust.
’ü« Basaltic rocks contain mostly darker silicate minerals and calcium-
rich plagioclase feldspar and little quartz. Because of the high 
percentage of ferrromagnesian minerals in basaltic rocks, geologist 
refer to them as mafic (ma for magnesium and f for ferrum).
’ü« Basaltic rocks are dark colored and tend to be more dense than granitic 
rocks.
’ü« Andesitic rocks have a composition between granites and basalts.
’ü« They generally contain about 25% dark silicate minerals (amphibole, 
pyroxene, and biotite mica) with the remaining 75% consisting of 
plagioclase  feldspar.
 27
Table of Contents
Felsic
Mafic

Igneous Rocks
’ü« Granite
’ü« Rhyollite
’ü« Pumice 
’ü« Obsidian 
’ü« Gabbro 
’ü« Basalt
’ü« Diabase 
’ü« Andesite 
’ü« Diorite
’ü« Tuff
28
Table of Contents
Extrusive Igneous Rocks in North America
Intrusive Igneous Rocks 
in North America
www.usgs.gov
www.usgs.gov

Granite
’ü« Granite is a felsic intrusive igneous rock and has either a phaneritic or porphyritic texture. 
’ü« Granite cools very slowly and often forms large masses of rock that are referred to as 
plutons or batholiths.
’ü« Granite usually contains about 20-50% quartz, 30-60% feldspar, and the remaining 5-10% 
darker minerals such as biotite.
’ü« The quartz grains are usually spherical in shape and are a white to grayish color.
’ü« The feldspars grains are mostly potassium and sodium rich varieties with individual 
rectangular shaped grains.  The feldspars are often white, grey, or pinkish in color 
depending on the chemical composition.
’ü« The remaining darker minerals usually consist of muscovite, biotite and amphibole 
and are generally black. 
South Carolina Geological Survey 
Kershaw Pink Granite, South Carolina
Coarse-grained granite
South Carolina Geological Survey
Winnsboro Blue Granite, South Carolina
Fine-grained granite
Feldspar
Quartz
Biotite
 29
Table of Contents

Rhyolite
’ü« Rhyolite is a felsic, extrusive igneous rock and usually has an aphanitic 
texture with glassy fragments and phenocrysts depending on the rate of 
cooling. Glassy fragments form from rapid cooling and phenocrysts
form from slower cooling rates. 
’ü« Rhyolite forms very rapidly from lava flows on the EarthŌĆÖs surface.
’ü« Rhyolite contains mostly light colored quartz and feldspar minerals.
’ü« These minerals generally give the rock a pink or grayish color.
Copyright ┬® Dr. Richard Busch
Fine-grained rhyolite
30
Table of Contents

Pumice
’ü« Pumice is a felsic, extrusive igneous rock with a glassy, vesicular texture 
formed from a combination of rapid cooling and a high gas content.
’ü« Pumice forms in similar condition as obsidian, and the two can often be 
found in close proximity. 
’ü« Pumice is so light from the presence of lots of gas bubbles pockets  that 
it often floats when placed in water.
Copyright ┬® 2006 Andrew Alden, geology.about.com, 
reproduced under educational fair use." 
Pumice with a vesicular texture
31
Table of Contents

Obsidian
’ü« Obsidian is a felsic, extrusive igneous rock with a glassy texture.
’ü« Obsidian forms very quickly from the rapid cooling of silica-rich lava.
’ü« Unlike other minerals and rocks, the ions that form obsidian are 
unordered, or amorphous, meaning they have no structure, and as a 
result it produces a conchoidal fracture when broken.
’ü« Thin sections of obsidian appear translucent and it is the presence of 
various metallic ions that give it an overall dark appearance.  
Copyright ┬® 2006 Andrew Alden, geology.about.com, 
reproduced under educational fair use
Obsidian
32
Table of Contents

Gabbro
’ü« Gabbro is a mafic, intrusive medium to coarse-grained igneous rock 
with a phaneritic texture.
’ü« Gabbro is composed primarily of pyroxene, with calcium-rich 
plagioclase feldspar and small amounts of olivine and amphibole.
’ü« Large gabbro intrusions are often sources of economically valuable  
nickel, chromium, and platinum.
Copyright ┬® Dr. Richard Busch
Medium-grained gabbro
33
Table of Contents

Basalt
’ü« Basalt is a mafic, extrusive fine-grained  dark green to black volcanic 
rock with a  porphyritic texture.
’ü« Basalt is composed primarily of pyroxene, and calcium-rich plagioclase 
with small amounts of olivine and amphibole.
Copyright ┬®  Dr. Richard Busch 
34
Table of Contents

Diabase
’ü« Diabase is a medium to fine-grained mafic, intrusive igneous rock. 
’ü« Diabase consists primarily of iron-rich pyroxenes and plagioclase 
labradorite.
’ü« It is often very dark colored, but can be mottled with lighter colors.
’ü« Diabase dikes are tabular intrusions of diabase that fill fractures below 
the EarthŌĆÖs surface.
35
Table of Contents
commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Image:Diabas_1.jpg

Andesite
’ü« Andesite is an intermediate, extrusive igneous rock with a 
predominantly fine-grained porphyritic texture that forms during 
volcanic eruptions.
’ü« Andesite main contain phenocrysts which are usually large-grained 
feldspar or amphibole minerals. 
Copyright ┬®  Dr. Richard Busch 
Andesite with amphibole phenocrysts 
36
Table of Contents

Diorite
’ü« Diorite is an intermediate, intrusive igneous rock with a predominantly 
coarse-grained phaneritic texture .
’ü« Diorite is composed of quartz, sodium-rich plagioclase, and amphibole 
or biotite.
’ü« The composition of diorite looks similar to granite, except that diorite 
contains a greater concentration of darker mafic minerals. 
37
Table of Contents
http://www.mii.org/index.html

Tuff
’ü« Tuff is an extrusive, pyroclastic rock composed of an aggregate of tiny ash 
fragments ejected during volcanic eruption. 
’ü« A mixture of various other extrusive rock fragments may weld with tuff 
making a cemented mass of ash and other rock/mineral fragments.
’ü« Tuff may also be used as a descriptor along side other rocks depending on 
the relative concentration of rock to ash ratio, for example a rhyolite tuff.
Copyright ┬®  Dr. Richard Busch 
 38
Table of Contents

Igneous Rocks in the Landscape
Mount Rushmore in the Black Hills of South Dakota 
is a Precambrian igneous, granitic batholith.
Copyright ┬® David Spear
39
Table of Contents
Devils Tower  at Devils Tower National 
Monument in Wyoming is an intrusive 
igneous rock formation that is exposed from 
millions of years of weathering and erosion of 
the surrounding landscape. 
Copyright ┬® Louis Maher University of Wisconsin

Igneous Rocks in South Carolina
40
Table of Contents


South Carolina Science Academic 
Standards: Grade 3 
41
Table of Contents
1) EarthŌĆÖs Materials and Changes:
Standard 3-3: 
The student will demonstrate an understanding of EarthŌĆÖs composition and the changes that occur to the features of 
EarthŌĆÖs surface. (Earth Science).
Indicators:
3-3.1: Classify rocks (including sedimentary, igneous, and metamorphic).  (slides:  3-26 )  

Resources and References
Christopherson, R. W. ,2002, Geosystems (4th ed.):  Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, Prentice Hall.
Christopherson, R. W., 2004, Elemental Geosystems (4th ed.):  Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, Prentice Hall.
Gillespie, M. R., 1999, BGS Rock Classification Scheme, Volume 1, classification of igneous rocks:  British Geological
Survey Research Report (2nd Edition) RR 99-06.
Keller, E. A., 2000, Environmental Geology (8th ed.):  Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, Prentice Hall.
Lutgens, F.  K., and Tarbuck, E. J., 2003, Essentials of Geology (8th ed.):  Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, Prentice Hall.
42
Table of Contents